Notebook to run GSEA with shuffled gene sets (#151)
AlexsLemonade/scpca-paper-figures: analysis/pseudobulk-bulk-prediction/notebooks/perform-gsea.Rmd

  model_expr_threshold: 0.25
  reps: 50
---

The purpose of this notebook is to run GSEA on the median of linear model residuals.
Genes that are enriched in higher or lower residual values may point to classes genes that are preferentially detected by bulk vs single-cell RNASeq technologies.

In addition, we will also run the same GSEA on shuffled gene sets (with `r params$reps`) to assess whether any results from GSEA are likely to be meaningful or noise. 

* This notebook will use the `r params$msigdbr_category` gene sets from `MSigDB` for the GSEA.
* This notebook will perform analyses on models from data filtered with this expression threshold: `r params$model_expr_threshold`.

## Setup

```{r setup}
renv::load()

library(ggplot2)
library(clusterProfiler)
theme_set(theme_bw())
set.seed(2025)
```

### Paths

```{r paths}
model_dir <- here::here("analysis", "pseudobulk-bulk-prediction", "results", "models")
ensembl_symbol_df <- readr::read_tsv(
  here::here("analysis", "bulk-deconvolution", "data", "reference", "ensembl_symbol.tsv"), 
  show_col_types = FALSE
)
```

### Functions

This chunk defines a function to create a data frame with a shuffled version of genesets.
```{r}

> generate_shuffle <- function(geneset_count_df, ensembl_ids){

Reviewer: I think my preferred approach would be to have this function take the `geneset_df` and number of replicates and return _all of the random genesets_ instead of getting passed to `purrr::map()`. That strikes me as more straightforward to follow (and more self-contained, which are related concepts IMO) if I had to return to this after some months.

  )
```

Now, we can run GSEA on all shuffled gene set versions:

(This next chunk takes a little bit to run; we'll turn off messages and warnings since this is quite a lot of GSEAs!)

```{r, message = FALSE, warning = FALSE}
shuffled_gsea_df <- ranked_residuals_list |>
  purrr::map(
  \(ranked_genes) {
    
    purrr::map(
      shuffled_geneset_df, 
      \(shuffled_rep) {
        gsea_result <- clusterProfiler::GSEA(
          geneList = ranked_genes, 
          TERM2GENE = shuffled_rep
        )
        gsea_result@result |>
          dplyr::summarize(
            bulk_enriched = sum(NES > 0), 
            pseudobulk_enriched = sum(NES < 0)
          )
      }
    ) |> purrr::list_rbind(names_to = "rep")
    
  }) |> 
  purrr::list_rbind(names_to = "project_id") |>
  # format data for plotting
  tidyr::pivot_longer(
    contains("enriched"), 
    names_to = "direction", 
    values_to = "count"
  ) |>
  dplyr::mutate(
    # pseudobulk should be first
    direction = forcats::fct_rev(direction), 
    # calculate fraction version
    frac = count/num_genesets
  )
```

## Compare GSEA to shuffled GSEA results

Finally, we'll make plots comparing these two analyses:

> * A bar plot of the number of significant pathways per project detected with GSEA

Reviewer: This is my interpretation of the plot, anyway:
```suggestion
* A bar plot of the proportion of input pathways returned as significant per project detected with GSEA
```

> * A histogram of the number of significant pathways per project detected across the `r params$reps` replicates of shuffled GSEAs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A histogram of the proportion of input random gene sets returned as significant per project detected across the `r params$reps` replicates of GSEA
```
